Split ObjectFifo lowering into multiple passes and operations (#3553)
Xilinx/mlir-aie: docs/ObjectFifoLowering.md

<!-- Copyright (C) 2026 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. -->
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception -->

# ObjectFifo Lowering

An `aie.objectfifo` enables data movement at object-size granularity in a
first-in-first-out manner, either between two tiles (1:1), as a broadcast (1:N),

> or, using `aie.objectfifo.link`, as join and distribute patterns (N:M). The

Author: ```suggestion
first-in-first-out manner, either between two tiles, as a broadcast,
or, using `aie.objectfifo.link`, as join and distribute patterns. The
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

ObjectFifo provides buffering, and users may acquire and hold multiple objects

> at a time (e.g. sliding windows). The current implementation provides

Author: ```suggestion
at a time (e.g., sliding windows). The current implementation provides
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

buffering using a rotating set of `aie.buffer`s, synchronization between
producers and consumers using `aie.lock`s, routing using `aie.flow` or
`aie.packet_flow`, movement of data either using shared memory or DMA programs
(`aie.mem`, `aie.memtile_dma` and `aie.shim_dma`), and object access on cores.

This page documents how we arrive at a concrete lowering for a given high-level
ObjectFifo in multiple passes. Users requiring lower-level control may find the
intermediate levels useful.

## Frontend operations

| Operation | What it holds |
| --- | --- |

> | `aie.objectfifo` | The whole data movement: element type, depth, producer tile and consumer tiles. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `aie.objectfifo` | A data movement pipe between producer and consumer tiles, with the capacity to buffer `depth` objects of the given element type. |
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

> | `aie.objectfifo.link` | Two or more fifos meeting on one tile, optionally with the offsets that make it a join or a distribute. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `aie.objectfifo.link` | A connection between two or more fifos meeting on one tile; multiple input or output fifos describe a join or distribute, respectively. |
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

| `aie.objectfifo.acquire` / `.release` | A core taking objects out of a fifo and giving them back. |

> | `aie.objectfifo.allocate` | A delegate tile whose memory holds the objects. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `aie.objectfifo.allocate` | An (optional) manual allocation indicating on which tile the objects of the fifo should be held. |
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

| `aie.objectfifo.register_external_buffers` | DDR buffers backing a shim end. |

## Operations after splitting

`--aie-objectfifo-split` replaces the frontend operations with these:

| Operation | What it holds |
| --- | --- |

> | `aie.objectfifo.pool` | A set of buffers and the contract for accessing them: the segments they may be accessed in, and the locks to acquire and release. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `aie.objectfifo.pool` | A set of buffers and the rules for accessing them: how the buffers are sliced into segments, and which locks users must acquire/release to access the segments. |
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

> | `aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint` | What a core needs to fill or drain the next object in a pool. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint` | Information the `acquire` and `release` operations on a core need to fill or drain the next object in a pool. |
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

> | `aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint` | The same for a DMA channel. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint` | A DMA channel and a reference to a pool; lowers to a DMA program that fills or drains the buffer pool from/onto the given channel. |
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

| `aie.objectfifo.dangling_endpoint` | One end of a stream this compiler does not program: a shim the host runtime drives, a PLIO boundary, or a core's raw stream port. |
| `aie.objectfifo.flow` | A circuit- or packet-switched connection from one draining endpoint to the filling endpoints it feeds. |

These are transient. By the end of the pipeline what remains is `aie.buffer`,
`aie.lock`, `aie.flow`, `aie.mem` / `aie.memtile_dma` / `aie.shim_dma`, and
`aie.shim_dma_allocation`.

### Pools

A pool is a set of buffers and the contract for accessing them.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.pool @P(%tile) {
  depth    = 2 : i32,
  buffers  = [@P_buff_0, @P_buff_1],
  segments = [#aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 0,  size = 16, produceLock = @p0, consumeLock = @c0>,
              #aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 16, size = 20, produceLock = @p1, consumeLock = @c1>]
} : memref<36xi32>
```

The tile is where the buffers live and `depth` is how many of them rotate.

**Buffers and segments are different axes.** Buffers are the rotation axis:
`depth` objects taking turns. Segments partition a *single* object, and every
buffer carries every segment. Segments are listed in increasing offset order,

> do not overlap, and together cover the element type exactly.

Author: ```suggestion
do not overlap, and together cover the entire buffer.
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

An ordinary pool has one segment spanning the whole object. A joined or
distributed pool has one per participant.

On devices with binary locks a pool carries `locks`, one per buffer, and has a

> single implicit segment.

Author: ```suggestion
On devices with binary locks (AIE1) a pool carries `locks`, one per buffer, and
 has a single implicit segment. Join/distribute is not supported on AIE1.
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

### The access contract

A segment's `produceLock` is taken by whoever fills it and its `consumeLock` by

> whoever drains it:

Author: ```suggestion
On AIE2 (semaphore locks), users of a pool are expected to acquire locks as 
follows before reading from or writing to buffers in the pool:
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

- filling actor: acquire `produceLock`, release `consumeLock`
- draining actor: acquire `consumeLock`, release `produceLock`

With semaphore locks the value counts how many objects are claimed. With binary
locks one lock per buffer serves both directions, and the direction is carried

> in the lock value.

Author: ```suggestion
With semaphore locks the value counts how many objects are claimed. 

AIE1 uses binary locks, which are supplied in the `locks` attribute. Producers
and consumers toggle the same lock with opposite values (0/1).
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

### Endpoints

> An endpoint is an actor: something that fills or drains a pool.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
An endpoint is an actor: something that fills or drains a pool.

Endpoints lower to code (DMA program or core code) that accesses the buffers 
in the referenced pool in sequence, following its expected synchronization 
protocol (lock acquire/releases).

```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint @c(%tile) fills  @P
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint  @d(%tile) drains @P {channelIndex = 0 : i32}
```

`fills` and `drains` say what the actor does to the pool's buffers. The
endpoint's own tile is where the actor is, which for shared memory differs from

> the pool's tile.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: (Claude) Removed.

**Every segment has exactly one filler and exactly one drainer.** A pool with

> several fillers is a join; one with several drainers is a distribute.

Author: ```suggestion
**Every _segment_ has exactly one filler and exactly one drainer.** A multi-segment
pool with several fillers is a join; one with several drainers is a distribute.

The `dangling_endpoint` does not follow these semantics: It is an escape hatch for 
endpoints that do not want to use the pool abstraction, as a stand-in for the other
end of a `objectfifo.flow`. It names only a DMA channel, which a user can then
program in other ways.
```

#### Selecting segments

`segments` picks which of the pool's segments an actor handles. Indices are
strictly increasing. Omitting the attribute selects segment zero, and is valid
on a single-segment pool.

```mlir

> aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @d(%tile) fills @P {segments = array<i32: 0, 1>}

Author: ```suggestion
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @d(%tile) fills @P {segments = array<i32: 0, 1>}
// Results in a DMA program that accesses the first two segments of buffers in @P.
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

```

#### Per-segment transforms

A DMA endpoint may carry `dimensions` (a strided access pattern) and
`padDimensions`. Both are **positional**: entry N describes the segment named by
`segments[N]`, and each must have exactly as many entries as `segments`. An
empty inner array means no transform for that segment.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @d(%tile) drains @P {
  segments   = array<i32: 0, 1>,
  dimensions = #aie<bd_dim_layout_array_array[
    [<size = 4, stride = 4>, <size = 4, stride = 1>],   // segment 0

>     []]>                                               // segment 1, linear

Author: ```suggestion
    [<size = 4, stride = 4>, <size = 4, stride = 1>],   // segment 0
    []]>                                                // segment 1, linear
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

}
```

Padding applies on a draining endpoint, where data goes out on the stream.

#### Dangling endpoints

An end with no pool behind it is a `dangling_endpoint`. It holds a tile, a

> direction and a port, which is what a flow needs to reach it:

Author: ```suggestion
The `dangling_endpoint` is an atypical endpoint that does not name a pool: 
It is an escape hatch for endpoints that do not want to use the pool abstraction, 
as a stand-in for the other end of a `objectfifo.flow`. It names only a DMA 
channel on a tile, which a user can then program in other ways.
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.dangling_endpoint @in(%shim) MM2S DMA  {fifoName = "of_in"}
aie.objectfifo.dangling_endpoint @s(%tile)  MM2S Core {channelIndex = 0 : i32}
```

A shim whose transfers the runtime sequence issues has nothing to pool, since
the addresses arrive at dispatch; it lowers to an `aie.shim_dma_allocation`
recording the tile, direction and channel. A shim that registers external
buffers has a pool and is an ordinary `dma_endpoint` with a BD chain.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: (Claude) Removed.

### Flows

> 

Author: ```suggestion
### Flows

Flows name two endpoints and lower to a circuit- or packet-switched route 
between them.
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.flow from @d1 to [@d2, @d3]
```

Several destinations are a broadcast: one source channel feeding a multicast
route.

A flow marked `packet` becomes an `aie.packet_flow` and shares the stream;
circuit flows reserve theirs. Both kinds coexist in one device. `packet_id`
pins the id; otherwise allocation picks the lowest id no other flow uses.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.flow from @d1 to [@d2] {packet, packet_id = 7 : i8}
```

At the frontend this is chosen per fifo, with the same two attributes on
`aie.objectfifo`, or `ObjectFifo(..., packet=True, packet_id=7)` in IRON.

> ## Shapes

Author: ```suggestion
## Examples
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

> ### Through DMAs

Author: ```suggestion
### Core-to-Core FIFO via DMAs
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.pool @producer_pool(%t02) ...
aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint @prod_core(%t02) fills  @producer_pool
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint  @prod_dma(%t02)  drains @producer_pool

aie.objectfifo.pool @consumer_pool(%t25) ...
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint  @cons_dma(%t25)  fills  @consumer_pool
aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint @cons_core(%t25) drains @consumer_pool

aie.objectfifo.flow from @prod_dma to [@cons_dma]
```

Two pools, one per tile, joined by a stream.

> ### Shared memory

Author: ```suggestion
### Core-to-Core FIFO via Shared Memory
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

A fifo used within one core, or across neighboring cores that share memory, is
one pool with two core endpoints:

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.pool @smem(%t02) {depth = 4 : i32,
    segments = [#aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 0, size = 16>]} : memref<16xi32>
aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint @prod(%t02) fills  @smem
aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint @cons(%t03) drains @smem
```

### Passthrough

> 

Author: ```suggestion
### Buffered Pass-through via DMA

```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

A one-to-one `aie.objectfifo.link` is a single pool with a DMA filling it and
another draining it:

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.pool @link_pool(%t21) ...
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @link_in(%t21)  fills  @link_pool
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @link_out(%t21) drains @link_pool
```

The two ends may move different amounts per transfer, which sets the stream
granularity. The pool keeps one segment.

> ### Join and distribute

Author: ```suggestion
### 2:1 Join via DMA
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.pool @out_pool(%t21) {
  depth = 2 : i32,
  segments = [#aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 0,  size = 16>,
              #aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 16, size = 32>]} : memref<48xi32>

aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @fill_0(%t21)    fills  @out_pool {segments = array<i32: 0>}
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @fill_1(%t21)    fills  @out_pool {segments = array<i32: 1>}
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @drain_all(%t21) drains @out_pool {segments = array<i32: 0, 1>}
```

Two DMAs fill different segments of one pool, each ordered by its own locks, and
one DMA drains the whole object. Distribute is the same picture reversed: one
endpoint fills the whole object and N endpoints each drain one segment.

A link point needs a memory module for the shared object and a device with
counting locks: a MemTile or a compute tile.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: (Claude) Removed.

## The pipeline

`--aie-objectFifo-stateful-transform` runs these in order. Its options:
`skip-verify=true` drops step 2, and `packet-sw-objFifos=true` makes every flow
packet-switched.

| Pass | Emits | Consumes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--aie-objectfifo-split` | pools, endpoints, flows | `aie.objectfifo`, `aie.objectfifo.link` |
| `--aie-objectfifo-verify` | diagnostics only | — |

> | `--aie-objectfifo-allocate` | `aie.buffer`, `aie.lock`, channel indices, `aie.flow` / `aie.packet_flow`, `aie.shim_dma_allocation` | `aie.objectfifo.flow` |

Author: ```suggestion
| `--aie-objectfifo-allocate` | `pool`s with buffer/lock attributes, `aie.buffer`, `aie.lock`, channel indices, `aie.flow` / `aie.packet_flow`, `aie.shim_dma_allocation` | `aie.objectfifo.flow`, `pool`s without buffer/lock attributes |
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

| `--aie-objectfifo-lower-dmas` | BD chains | `dma_endpoint`, `dangling_endpoint` |
| `--aie-objectfifo-lower-cores` | `use_lock` and buffer selection | `core_endpoint`, `acquire`, `release` |
| `--aie-objectfifo-erase-pools` | — | unreferenced pools |

Each pass replaces the operations it consumes, so the pipeline is idempotent:
lower, edit the result, and re-run. Adding a new `aie.objectfifo` to lowered IR
and re-running lowers the new one and leaves the rest alone.

Each endpoint has exactly one consuming pass, so `lower-dmas` and `lower-cores`
are order-independent.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: (Claude) Removed.

    segments = [#aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 0, size = 16>]} : memref<16xi32>
aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint @of1_prod(%tile_0_2) fills @of1_pool
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @of1_prod_dma(%tile_0_2) drains @of1_pool {fifoName = "of1"}
aie.objectfifo.pool @of1_cons_pool(%tile_2_5) {depth = 2 : i32, fifoName = "of1",
    segments = [#aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 0, size = 16>]} : memref<16xi32>
aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint @of1_cons(%tile_2_5) drains @of1_cons_pool
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @of1_cons_dma(%tile_2_5) fills @of1_cons_pool {fifoName = "of1"}
aie.objectfifo.flow from @of1_prod_dma to [@of1_cons_dma]

%e = aie.objectfifo.acquire @of1_prod : memref<16xi32>
```

A core's `acquire` and `release` name the endpoint they work through; the
endpoint's role gives the direction.

Pool depth covers the largest acquire a core on that tile makes, plus one so the
core can hold an object while the next arrives. A tile no core touches gets the
fifo's declared size.

Writing pools, endpoints and flows by hand and starting the pipeline at step 3
gives access to shapes beyond what the frontend expresses, such as a custom
segment partition.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: (Claude) Removed.

### 2. `--aie-objectfifo-verify`

Checks the completeness rules listed below. Designs that supply an endpoint by
hand at BD level lower with `skip-verify=true`.

### 3. `--aie-objectfifo-allocate`

Gives pools their buffers and locks, and endpoints their channels, flows and
shim allocations.

```mlir
%of1_buff_0 = aie.buffer(%tile_0_2) {sym_name = "of1_buff_0"} : memref<16xi32>
%of1_buff_1 = aie.buffer(%tile_0_2) {sym_name = "of1_buff_1"} : memref<16xi32>
%of1_prod_lock_0 = aie.lock(%tile_0_2) {init = 2 : i32, sym_name = "of1_prod_lock_0"}
%of1_cons_lock_0 = aie.lock(%tile_0_2) {init = 0 : i32, sym_name = "of1_cons_lock_0"}

aie.objectfifo.pool @of1_pool(%tile_0_2) {buffers = [@of1_buff_0, @of1_buff_1],
    depth = 2 : i32, fifoName = "of1",
    segments = [#aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 0, size = 16,

>                  produceLock = @of1_prod_lock_0, consumeLock = @of1_cons_lock_0>]} : memref<16xi32>

Author: ```suggestion
aie.objectfifo.pool @of1_pool(%tile_0_2) {
    depth = 2 : i32, fifoName = "of1",
    buffers = [@of1_buff_0, @of1_buff_1],
    segments = [#aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 0, size = 16,
                 produceLock = @of1_prod_lock_0, consumeLock = @of1_cons_lock_0>]} : memref<16xi32>
// Note the set buffer and lock attributes.
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

aie.flow(%tile_0_2, DMA : 0, %tile_2_5, DMA : 0)
```

Attributes already present are kept, so writing `aie.buffer` ops and naming them
in the pool, attaching locks to a segment, or setting `channelIndex` on an
endpoint overrides that choice; this pass fills in the rest.

### 4. `--aie-objectfifo-lower-dmas`

Turns each `dma_endpoint` into the BD chain that walks its pool's buffers,
buffer-major and segment-minor:

```
for each buffer b in pool.buffers:
  for each segment s selected by the endpoint:
    acquire( drains ? s.consumeLock : s.produceLock )
    dma_bd(b, s.offset, s.size)
    release( drains ? s.produceLock : s.consumeLock )
```

```mlir
%mem_0_2 = aie.mem(%tile_0_2) {
  %0 = aie.dma_start(MM2S, 0, ^bb1, ^bb3)
^bb1:
  aie.use_lock(%of1_cons_lock_0, AcquireGreaterEqual, %c1_i32)
  aie.dma_bd(%of1_buff_0 : memref<16xi32> offset = 0 len = 16)
  aie.use_lock(%of1_prod_lock_0, Release, %c1_i32_0)
  aie.next_bd ^bb2
^bb2:   // the same, with %of1_buff_1
  ...
```

A join's draining endpoint selects every segment and emits `depth × segments`
descriptors; each filling endpoint selects one and emits `depth`.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: (Claude) Removed.

To supply your own BD chain, write the `aie.mem` block and omit the
`dma_endpoint`; the pool and its locks are still generated, and your chain uses
those locks. A channel an existing `aie.dma_start` programs is an error here.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: (Claude) Removed.

### 5. `--aie-objectfifo-lower-cores`

> Turns `acquire` and `release` into `use_lock` plus a rotating buffer selection.

Author: ```suggestion
Turns `acquire` and `release` operations in AIE core code into `use_lock`
and a rotating buffer selection.
```

Author: (Claude) Applied.

```mlir
%0 = arith.subi %c1_i32, %c0_i32 : i32   // acquire(N) is absolute:
%1 = arith.maxsi %0, %c0_i32_0 : i32     // delta = max(N - held, 0)
aie.use_lock(%of1_prod_lock_0, AcquireGreaterEqual, %1)
%4 = scf.index_switch %3 -> memref<16xi32>
case 0 { scf.yield %of1_buff_0 : memref<16xi32> }
case 1 { scf.yield %of1_buff_1 : memref<16xi32> }
```

The `index_switch` folds to a concrete buffer once the loops unroll.

A core sees one memref, so a core endpoint's segments are a contiguous run of
the object. It is handed the buffer itself when that run is the whole object,
and a `memref.subview` for a shorter run. An acquire emits one

> `AcquireGreaterEqual` per selected segment, all with the same delta.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: (Claude) Removed.

<!-- Copyright (C) 2026 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. -->
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception -->

> # ObjectFifo Lowering

Reviewer: Is this hooked up to the API/website docs as supplemental material?

Author: It is indeed

These are transient. By the end of the pipeline what remains is `aie.buffer`,
`aie.lock`, `aie.flow`, `aie.mem` / `aie.memtile_dma` / `aie.shim_dma`, and
`aie.shim_dma_allocation`.

### Pools

A pool is a set of buffers and the contract for accessing them.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.pool @P(%tile) {
  depth    = 2 : i32,
  buffers  = [@P_buff_0, @P_buff_1],
  segments = [#aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 0,  size = 16, produceLock = @p0, consumeLock = @c0>,
              #aie.objectfifo_segment<offset = 16, size = 20, produceLock = @p1, consumeLock = @c1>]
} : memref<36xi32>
```

The tile is where the buffers live and `depth` is how many of them rotate.

**Buffers and segments are different axes.** Buffers are the rotation axis:
`depth` objects taking turns. Segments partition a *single* object, and every
buffer carries every segment. Segments are listed in increasing offset order,
do not overlap, and together cover the entire buffer.

An ordinary pool has one segment spanning the whole object. A joined or
distributed pool has one per participant.

On devices with binary locks (AIE1) a pool carries `locks`, one per buffer, and

> has a single implicit segment. Join/distribute is not supported on AIE1.

Reviewer: Is this an existing limitation or a new one?

Author: Existing

### The access contract

On AIE2 (semaphore locks), users of a pool are expected to acquire locks as
follows before reading from or writing to buffers in the pool:

- filling actor: acquire `produceLock`, release `consumeLock`
- draining actor: acquire `consumeLock`, release `produceLock`

With semaphore locks the value counts how many objects are claimed.

AIE1 uses binary locks, which are supplied in the `locks` attribute. Producers
and consumers toggle the same lock with opposite values (0/1).

### Replication and iteration

> `repeatCount` sits on the pool the data leaves from. It makes that pool's

Reviewer: Just to make sure, can you double check that the documentation here is consistent with how the features exposed by the python API are consistent? I see changes there, but a double check might be a nice job for Claude.

Author: Claude -- investigate this and respond here.

Author: (Claude) Checked, and Erika's instinct was right — they were not consistent. Fixed in `a41e212d0b3`.

The markdown here matches the implementation. The Python docstrings did not: both still described the counts as MemTile-only, which is exactly what this PR made untrue.

```python
# before
repeat_count: If set, causes the MemTile DMA to replay the
    buffer descriptor this many times without a new DMA transfer from L3.

def set_iter_count(...):
    """Set iteration count for DMA BD chaining on MemTile for the ObjectFifo."""
```

Both now describe the sender/receiver asymmetry instead, matching the table in this doc: the sender replicates each object `repeat_count` times before moving to the next, the receiver covers a batch in one acquire with its lock initializers scaled, and `iter_count` is the passes each end makes over its own buffers.

Two things worth noting:

- Nothing in the Python layer ever *enforced* MemTile — `set_iter_count` only range-checks [1, 256], which still matches the verifier. So this was stale prose, not a functional gap.
- I left the `repeat_counts` docstrings on the join/distribute helpers saying "MemTile", because those helpers place their sub-fifos on a MemTile by construction, so it is accurate there.

### Endpoints

An endpoint is an actor: something that fills or drains a pool.

Endpoints lower to code (DMA program or core code) that accesses the buffers
in the referenced pool in sequence, following its expected synchronization
protocol (lock acquire/releases).

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.core_endpoint @c(%tile) fills  @P
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint  @d(%tile) drains @P {channelIndex = 0 : i32}
```

**Every segment has exactly one filler and exactly one drainer.** A pool with
several fillers is a join; one with several drainers is a distribute.

#### Selecting segments

`segments` picks which of the pool's segments an actor handles. Indices are
strictly increasing. Omitting the attribute selects segment zero, and is valid
on a single-segment pool.

```mlir
aie.objectfifo.dma_endpoint @d(%tile) fills @P {segments = array<i32: 0, 1>}
// Results in a DMA program that accesses the first two segments of buffers in @P.
```

#### Per-segment transforms

A DMA endpoint may carry `dimensions` (a strided access pattern) and
`padDimensions`. Both are **positional**: entry N describes the segment named by
`segments[N]`, and each must have exactly as many entries as `segments`. An

> empty inner array means no transform for that segment.

Reviewer: Food for thought (perhaps for a follow up PR, or just discussion -- no action recommended from me here at this point): I wonder when/if we should address https://github.com/Xilinx/mlir-aie/issues/1922? For the top-level functions, I'd appreciate a consistent representation throughout the dialect.
